---
layout: distill
title: john smeaton, 1759
date: 2021-02-05
description: Virtual Head and Analogue Simulation.

authors:
  - name: Christian Kassung
    url: "http://www.culture.hu-berlin.de/ck"
    affiliations:
      name: HU Berlin

bibliography: 2021-02-07-smeaton.bib
---

# 1,381 Experiments<d-footnote>This study was supported by the DFG-Kollegforschergruppe "Medienkulturen der Computersimulation" (KFOR 1927) of the Leuphana University LÃ¼neburg.</d-footnote>

From the spring of 1830 until December of the same year, the Franklin Institute
of the State of Pennsylvania conducted 1,381 experiments on the efficiency of
waterwheels. Seeing as "the circumstances, attending the action [of
waterwheels], are so complicated a nature as to baffle [\dots the theorist's]
powers of investigation," experimentation was deemed the only path to reliable
results.<d-cite key="anonym:1831"></d-cite> The expenditure for undertaking
this survey was enormous. A committee comprised of fourteen members of the
Institute was appointed to implement the project. The experimental setting
allowed the researchers to test wheels in overshot, breastshot, and undershot
positions, as well as to use different wheel diameters. At the end of the
project, the committee's reports to the Institute's journal comprised thousands
of numerical values distributed over impressive conglomeration tables of up to
eighteen columns.

Nevertheless, on December 23, 1843, the Irish civil engineer Robert Mallet wrote
a letter to the "London Mining Journal" in which he stated that "the Franklin
Institute has added nothing important to our knowledge, beyond what the
experiments of our great Smeaton, on \textit{his} 'insignificant models' gave
long ago."\footcite[169]{mallet:1844} This letter is only one statement in an
ongoing debate on the scientific value of waterwheel experiments.\footnote{Cf.\
\cite{whitelaw:1844} and \cite{morris:1844}.} And John Smeaton, the eminent
British engineer and instrument maker, had conducted his experiments almost 100
years previously. Indeed, there was a strong contradiction between Smeaton's and
the Franklin Institute's approaches. While Smeaton "used a dynamic prototype of
efficiency" to examine how motion should be measured, the Franklin Institute
"simply measured the effect when it was done."\footcite[15]{alexander:2008}
Although this distinction between dynamic and static measurement is
far-reaching, it reveals a fundamental common ground. They both used the same
method of minimizing turbulence in order to eliminate potential interference
from their measurements. The better a wheel is managed, the more smoothly the
water moves it. A skilled eye can thus monitor the efficiency of a waterwheel
simply by watching the patterns of the water's movement. But what do we actually
see when we observe flow patterns? This is the central question I will pursue in
this paper. By approaching it through the mid-18th century's knowledge of
waterwheels, I aim to provide support for my main argument that these measuring
practices function as analogue simulation media.

John Smeaton was a typical middle-class inventor. Born in 1724 and initially
trained as an attorney, by 1748 he had opened his first shop for scientific
instruments in London. During this time he improved the vacuum pump and
developed a mariner's compass.\footnote{Cf.\
\cite[10--11]{turner-skempton:1981}.} When James Watt came to London five years
later, Smeaton had already built his first water mill and turned to engineering
as a profession. His famous publication on the "Natural Powers of Water and Wind
to Turn Mills" was awarded the prestigious Copley Medal. The experiments on
which this paper was based constituted nearly seven years of research on
different types of watermills.\footnote{For more biographical information cf.\
\cite[19--21]{alexander:2008}.} The most prominent paper of the famous trio
comprised of Antoine De Parcieux, Johann Euler, and John Smeaton, it was
published in 1759 and hence some years after the other two.


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        <img class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/16.jpg">
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    LIGO measurement of gravitational waves at Hanford and Livingston compared with
the theoretically predicted values.
</div>
